1. Eur Respir J. 2026 Jul 23;68(1):2502611. doi: 10.1183/13993003.02611-2025. Print 
2026 Jul.

Clinical practice guideline for long COVID prevention and treatment.

Cao B(1)(2), Soriano JB(3)(4), Wang Q(5), Al-Aly Z(6), Gu X(7)(8), Wang G(9), 
Leo YS(10)(11), Jin Y(12)(13), Shi Q(14)(8), Ohmagari N(15), Liu E(16), Paredes 
R(17), Lu H(18), Kim ES(19)(20), Zhang D(21), Estill J(22)(23), Li L(24), Spruyt 
K(25), Yang W(26), Wang Y(27), Ran MS(28), Luo X(29)(8), Zhang H(30)(8), Xu 
J(31)(8), Zhang R(30)(8), Zhao J(31)(8), Zhao J(32)(8), Evans RA(33)(34), Jeon 
J(35), Peluso MJ(36), Errett LE(37), Zhang W(38), Chalmers JD(39), Chen 
Y(31)(32)(40)(41)(2); Multidisciplinary Working Group on Long COVID Practice 
Guidelines (MWG-LCPG).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Respiratory Medicine, State Key Laboratory of Respiratory 
Health and Multimorbidity, National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory 
Diseases, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Capital Medical University, 
Institute of Respiratory Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, New 
Cornerstone Science Laboratory, Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Medicine, Center of Respiratory Medicine, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, 
Tsinghua University-Peking University Joint Center for Life Sciences, Beijing, 
China caobin_ben@163.com.
(2)Equally contributing authors.
(3)Facultat de Medicina, Universitat de les Illes Balears, Palma, Spain.
(4)Centro de Investigación en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain.
(5)Beijing Key Laboratory of Surveillance, Early Warning and Pathogen Research 
on Emerging Infectious Diseases, Beijing Research Center for Respiratory 
Infectious Diseases, Beijing Center for Disease Prevention and Control, Beijing, 
China.
(6)VA St. Louis Health Care System, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(7)National Center for Respiratory Medicine, State Key Laboratory of Respiratory 
Health and Multimorbidity, National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory 
Diseases, Institute of Respiratory Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Department of Clinical Research and Data Management, Center of 
Respiratory Medicine, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.
(8)Not panel members, but core evidence synthesis and evaluation group members.
(9)Department of Infectious Disease, Center for Liver Disease, Peking University 
First Hospital, Beijing, China.
(10)National Center for Infectious Disease, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(11)Lee Kong Chien School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(12)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Hubei Province 
Clinical Research Center for Major Respiratory Diseases, NHC Key Laboratory of 
Pulmonary Diseases, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University 
of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(13)Hubei Provincial Key Laboratory of Biological Targeted Therapy, MOE Key 
Laboratory of Biological Targeted Therapy, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(14)The First School of Clinical Medicine, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.
(15)Disease Control and Prevention Center, Japan Institute for Health Security, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(16)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, China.
(17)Department of Infectious Diseases, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(18)National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases, The Third 
People's Hospital of Shenzhen and The Second Affiliated Hospital of Southern 
University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China.
(19)Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, South Korea.
(20)Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seoul National University 
College of Medicine, Seongnam, Korea.
(21)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China.
(22)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.
(23)Institute of Global Health, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(24)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical 
University, Chongqing, China.
(25)NeuroDiderot-INSERM, Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(26)School of Population Medicine and Public Health, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, State Key Laboratory of Respiratory 
Health and Multimorbidity, Key Laboratory of Pathogen Infection Prevention and 
Control (Peking Union Medical College), Ministry of Education, Beijing, China.
(27)Department of Neurology and Centre for Clinical Neuroscience, Daping 
Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(28)National Center for Mental Disorders, and Mental Health Center, West China 
Hospital, Sichuan University, China.
(29)Evidence-Based Medicine Center, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Lanzhou 
University, Lanzhou, China.
(30)National Center for Respiratory Medicine, State Key Laboratory of 
Respiratory Health and Multimorbidity, National Clinical Research Center for 
Respiratory Diseases, Institute of Respiratory Medicine, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences, Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Center of 
Respiratory Medicine, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.
(31)Department of Pediatric Research Institute, Children's Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, National Clinical Research Center for Child Health and 
Disorders, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and 
Disorders, China International Science and Technology Cooperation Base of Child 
Development and Critical Disorders, Chevidence Lab Child and Adolescent Health, 
Department of Pediatric Research Institute, Children's Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(32)Research Center for Clinical Medicine, The First Hospital of Lanzhou 
University, Lanzhou, China.
(33)The Institute for Lung Health, NIHR Leicester Biomedical Research Centre, 
University Hospitals of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(34)Department of Respiratory Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(35)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, National 
Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
(36)Division of HIV, Infectious Diseases, and Global Medicine, University of 
California, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(37)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(38)Department of Infectious Diseases, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Infectious 
Diseases and Biosafety Emergency Response, National Medical Center for 
Infectious Diseases, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(39)Scottish Centre for Respiratory Research, Ninewells Hospital and Medical 
School, Dundee, UK.
(40)Research Unit of Evidence-Based Evaluation and Guidelines, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Sciences (2021RU017), School of Basic Medical Sciences, Lanzhou 
University, Lanzhou, China.
(41)Key Laboratory of Evidence Based Medicine of Gansu Province, Lanzhou 
University, Lanzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: This guideline aims to address key clinical questions of long COVID, 
and to provide evidence-based recommendations. The target population is adults 
with long COVID. The primary users of the guideline are clinical physicians, 
clinical pharmacists, nurses and general practitioners in community healthcare 
institutions worldwide.
METHODS: The guideline was registered at the Practice guideline REgistration for 
transPAREncy platform (PREPARE-2024CN123) and followed a pre-specified protocol. 
A multidisciplinary working group was established and comprised 60 members from 
10 countries and 10 areas of expertise, with a strong background in long COVID 
research and clinical practice, and methodology of guideline development. 
Through a two-step process, we determined eight PICO (Population, Intervention, 
Comparator, Outcome) questions focusing on prevention and treatment of long 
COVID. After comprehensively searching literature, conducting systematic reviews 
and investigating patients' values and preferences, three rounds of Delphi 
survey were conducted among 24 international experts to reach consensus. The 
GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation) 
approach was applied to rate the certainty of evidence and determine the 
strength of recommendations.
RESULTS: The guideline presents 10 specific recommendations, each supported by 
existing, updated or newly conducted systematic reviews. The key recommendations 
are pertinent to the following issues: 1) suggestion of vaccination or use of 
antiviral agents during the acute phase of COVID-19 to prevent long COVID; 2) 
suggestions against the use of nirmatrelvir/ritonavir and glucocorticoids 
(patients with persistent respiratory symptoms and olfactory disorders) for long 
COVID treatment; 3) suggestions supporting the use of multispecies probiotics, 
cognitive behavioural therapy (patients with fatigue), and personalised 
rehabilitation (after ruling out post-exertional malaise) for long COVID 
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: This guideline provides evidence-based recommendations for the 
prevention and treatment of long COVID. Given the limited and often 
low-methodological-quality evidence, all recommendations are supported by very 
low to moderate certainty. Further high-quality studies are needed to strengthen 
the evidence base.

Copyright ©The authors 2026.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.02611-2025
PMCID: PMC13392456
PMID: 41856572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: B. Cao is a member of the 
European Respiratory Journal editorial board. J.B. Soriano reports grants from 
Linde via Hospital Universitario de La Princesa, consultancy fees from ERS and 
SEPAR, participation in speaking activities, advisory committees and 
consultancies for Air Liquide, Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, ERS, Grifols, GSK, Linde, Lipopharma, Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, 
RiRL, Rovi, SEPAR and Takeda, a leadership role for the Spanish Network of 
Research in Long COVID (REiCOP), and is an Associate Editor for the European 
Respiratory Journal. R. Paredes reports participation in an advisory board with 
Pfizer, Gilead and AstraZeneca. R.A. Evans reports grants from Genentech/Roche, 
lecture fees from Moderna, and fees for participation on an advisory board for 
the UK National COVID Inquiry. M.J. Peluso reports consultancy fees from Gilead 
Sciences and AstraZeneca. J.D. Chalmers reports grants or contracts from 
AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Genentech, Gilead Sciences, GlaxoSmithKline, Insmed, 
Grifols, Trudell, Verona and Boehringer Ingelheim, and consulting fees from 
AstraZeneca, Biomx, Chiesi, CSL Behring, Expedition, GlaxoSmithKline, Insmed, 
Grifols, Boehringer Ingelheim, Pfizer, Sanofi/Regeneron and Zambon, and is the 
Chief Editor of the European Respiratory Journal. Y. Chen is the co-founder and 
co-chair of the RIGHT (Reporting Items for Practice Guidelines in Healthcare) 
working group. The remaining authors have no potential conflicts of interest to 
disclose.


2. Cell Rep Med. 2025 Aug 19;6(8):102259. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2025.102259. Epub 
2025 Jul 30.

Causes of symptoms and symptom persistence in long COVID and myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome.

Komaroff AL(1), Dantzer R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of General Medicine, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic 
address: komaroff@hms.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Debilitating symptoms for many years can follow acute COVID-19 ("long COVID"), 
myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS), and various 
post-acute infection syndromes (PAISs). Together, long COVID and ME/CFS affect 
60-400 million individuals, globally. Many similar underlying biological 
abnormalities have been identified in both conditions including autoantibodies 
against neural targets, endothelial dysfunction, acquired mitochondrial 
dysfunction, and a pro-inflammatory gut microbiome. Each of these abnormalities 
may directly cause some of the symptoms. In addition, the symptoms also may be 
caused by ancient, evolutionarily conserved symptomatic and metabolic responses 
to vital threats-sickness behavior and torpor-responses mediated by specific, 
recently discovered neural circuits. These neural circuits constitute a 
symptom-generating pathway, activated by neuroinflammation, which may be 
targeted by therapeutics to quell neuroinflammation. Many factors cause the 
symptoms to become chronic, including persistent infectious agents (and/or their 
nucleic acids and antigens) and the fact that many of the underlying biological 
abnormalities reinforce each other, creating ongoing physiological vicious 
cycles.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2025.102259
PMCID: PMC12432373
PMID: 40744021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.


3. Gut Microbes. 2025 Dec;17(1):2457495. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2025.2457495. Epub 
2025 Jan 24.

Long COVID and gut microbiome: insights into pathogenesis and therapeutics.

Lau RI(1)(2), Su Q(1)(2), Ng SC(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(2)Microbiota I-Center (MagIC), Hong Kong SAR, China.
(3)Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Digestive 
Disease, Institute of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong SAR, China.

Post-acute coronavirus disease 2019 syndrome (PACS), following severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection or coronavirus disease 
2019 (COVID-19), is typically characterized by long-term debilitating symptoms 
affecting multiple organs and systems. Unfortunately, there is currently a lack 
of effective treatment strategies. Altered gut microbiome has been proposed as 
one of the plausible mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of PACS; extensive 
studies have emerged to bridge the gap between the persistent symptoms and the 
dysbiosis of gut microbiome. Recent clinical trials have indicated that gut 
microbiome modulation using probiotics, prebiotics, and fecal microbiota 
transplantation (FMT) led to improvements in multiple symptoms related to PACS, 
including fatigue, memory loss, difficulty in concentration, gastrointestinal 
upset, and disturbances in sleep and mood. In this review, we highlight the 
latest evidence on the key microbial alterations observed in PACS, as well as 
the use of microbiome-based therapeutics in managing PACS symptoms. These novel 
findings altogether shed light on the treatment of PACS and other chronic 
conditions.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2025.2457495
PMCID: PMC11776476
PMID: 39854158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SCN has served as an advisory board member for 
Pfizer, Ferring, Janssen, and AbbVie and received honoraria as a speaker for 
Ferring, Tillotts, Menarini, Janssen, AbbVie, and Takeda; has received research 
grants through her affiliated institutions from Olympus, Ferring, and AbbVie; is 
a founder member, non-executive director, non-executive scientific advisor, and 
shareholder of GenieBiome Ltd; and receives patent royalties through her 
affiliated institutions. RIL is a Medical Affairs Manager of GenieBiome Ltd. QS 
is a Scientist (Diagnostics) of GenieBiome Ltd. RIL, QS, and SCN are named 
inventors of patent applications held by Microbiota I-Center (MagIC) that cover 
the therapeutic and diagnostic use of microbiome.


4. Wien Med Wochenschr. 2026 Apr;176(5-6):130-148. doi: 10.1007/s10354-025-01113-8. 
Epub 2025 Oct 29.

[Herbal treatment options for post-viral symptoms and long COVID].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Krassnig K(1), Bauer R(2), Glasl S(3), Haubenberger P(4), Evanzin HJ(5), 
Schneider K(3), Margotti D(6).

Author information:
(1)Wiener Schule für Traditionelle Chinesische Medizin, Wien, Österreich.
(2)Institut für Pharmazeutische Wissenschaften, Universität Graz, Graz, 
Österreich.
(3)Abteilung für Pharmakognosie, Dpt. für Pharmazeutische Wissenschaften, 
Universität Wien, Wien, Österreich.
(4)Primärversorgungseinheit Wien West, Wien, Österreich.
(5)Landesklinikum Mistelbach-Gänserndorf, Mistelbach, Österreich.
(6)Österreichische Gesellschaft für Phytotherapie (ÖGPHYT), Wien, Österreich. 
info@phytotherapie.at.

BACKGROUND: Long COVID and post-viral symptom complexes have become 
a significant focus in medical practice. There is an urgent need to provide 
evidence-based treatment options to those patients. The aim of the literature 
review was to summarize herbal medicinal products as a treatment option for 
post-viral conditions, particularly long COVID.
METHODS: A working group of the Austrian Society for Phytotherapy conducted 
a narrative review between 2022 and 2024, based on external literature from the 
PubMed, PubPharm and Scopus databases and clinical experience from practice. The 
review identified the most relevant medicinal plants and their preparations for 
the most common symptom complexes of long COVID.
RESULTS: A total of 98 publications and 24 monographs were included in the 
literature review. The symptom complexes (+ relevant phytopharmaceuticals) 
include neurological complaints, such as myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic 
fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) (Ginseng radix, Panax quinquefolii radix, Eleutherocci 
radix, Rhodiolae rhizoma et radix, Schisandrae fructus), nootropics (Ginkgo 
folium, Lavandulae flos), irritations of the respiratory tract (Liquiritiae 
radix, Nigellae semen, Eucalypti folium), gastrointestinal complaints (Gentianae 
radix, Centauri herba, Artemisii herba, Galangae rhizoma, Zingiberis rhizoma, 
Boswellia serrata, Curcuma longae rhizoma), circulatory weakness (Crataegi 
folium cum flore, Rosmarini folium, Salviae officinalis folium) and loss of 
smell (Rosae flos, Citri pericarpium, Caryophylli flos, Eucalypti folium). 
External evidence and clinical experience in medical practice show that many 
important symptoms of post-viral conditions can be successfully treated with 
herbal preparations.
CONCLUSION: Phytopharmaceuticals can provide evidence-based support for the 
therapeutic portfolio for viral diseases and their consequences in current and 
future viral epidemics.

Publisher: ZUSAMMENFASSUNG: HINTERGRUND: Long-COVID bzw. postvirale 
Symptomenkomplexe sind im medizinischen Alltag deutlich in den Fokus gerückt. Es 
besteht die dringende Notwendigkeit, Patienten aus dieser Symptomengruppe 
evidenzbasierte Behandlungsoptionen anzubieten. Ziel der Literaturrecherche war, 
pflanzliche Arzneimittel als Therapieoption bei postviralen Zuständen, 
insbesondere Long-COVID, zusammenzufassen.
METHODEN: Eine Arbeitsgruppe der Österreichischen Gesellschaft für Phytotherapie 
hat im Zeitraum von 2022 bis 2024 ein narratives Review basierend auf der 
externen Literatur der Datenbanken PubMed, PubPharm und Scopus und der 
klinischen Erfahrungen aus der Praxis erstellt, die relevantesten Arzneipflanzen 
bzw. deren Zubereitungen den häufigsten Symptomenkomplexen zugeordnet und einen 
therapeutischen Einsatz bei Long-COVID diskutiert.
RESULTATE: Insgesamt wurden 98 Publikationen und 24 Monografien in die 
Literaturübersicht inkludiert. Die Symptomkomplexe (+ relevante Phytopharmaka) 
umfassen neurologische Beschwerden wie myalgische Enzephalomyelitis/chronisches 
Fatigue-Syndrom (ME/CFS) (Ginseng radix, Panax quinquefolii radix, Eleutherocci 
radix, Rhodiolae rhizoma et radix, Schisandrae fructus), Nootropika (Ginkgo 
folium, Lavandulae flos), Reizzustände der Atemwege (Liquiritiae radix, Nigellae 
semen, Eucalypti folium), gastrointestinale Beschwerden (Gentianae radix, 
Centauri herba, Artemisii herba, Galangae rhizoma, Zingiberis rhizoma, Boswellia 
serrata, Curcumae longae rhizoma), Kreislaufschwäche (Crataegi folium cum flore, 
Rosmarini folium, Salviae officinalis folium) und Geruchsverlust (Rosae flos, 
Citri pericarpium, Caryophylli flos, Eucalypti folium). Die externe Evidenz und 
die klinischen Erfahrungen in der medizinischen Praxis zeigen, dass viele 
wichtige Symptome postviraler Zustände mit pflanzlichen Zubereitungen 
erfolgreich behandelt werden können.
SCHLUSSFOLGERUNGEN: Phytopharmaka können das therapeutische Portfolio bei 
viralen Erkrankungen und deren Folgen bei aktuellen und zukünftigen 
Virusepidemien evidenzbasiert erweitern.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10354-025-01113-8
PMCID: PMC13013262
PMID: 41160239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Interessenkonflikt: K. Krassnig, R. Bauer, 
S. Glasl, P. Haubenberger, H.J. Evanzin, K. Schneider und D. Margotti geben an, 
dass kein Interessenkonflikt besteht.


5. Immunol Med. 2026 Mar;49(1):35-58. doi: 10.1080/25785826.2025.2570902. Epub 2025 
Oct 21.

Long COVID: mechanisms of disease, multisystem sequelae, and prospects for 
treatment.

Oba S(1), Hosoya T(1), Iwai H(1), Yasuda S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Institute of Science Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Long COVID has emerged as a significant global health issue, affecting 
individuals across a wide spectrum of initial disease severity. While its 
definition and prevalence vary across studies, persistent symptoms such as 
fatigue, cognitive dysfunction, respiratory difficulties, and cardiovascular 
complications have been widely reported. Multiple pathophysiological mechanisms 
have been proposed, including incomplete viral clearance, reactivation of latent 
viruses, immune dysregulation, autoimmunity, endothelial dysfunction, microbiome 
alterations, and mitochondrial impairment. These interconnected processes are 
thought to contribute to chronic inflammation and multi-organ disease. To date, 
there are no established therapies for Long COVID, and management primarily 
focuses on symptomatic relief and rehabilitation. Vaccination has been shown to 
reduce the incidence of Long COVID, and emerging strategies, including antiviral 
agents, immune-modulating therapies, microbiome restoration, and 
mitochondria-targeted interventions, are under investigation. This review 
summarizes the current understanding of the epidemiology, pathophysiology, 
organ-specific manifestations, and potential therapeutic approaches for Long 
COVID, aiming to provide insights into future research directions and clinical 
management strategies.

DOI: 10.1080/25785826.2025.2570902
PMID: 41117273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]