1. Circulation. 2025 Nov 18;152(20):1411-1422. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.125.076575. Epub 2025 Aug 29.

Dapagliflozin in Patients Hospitalized for Heart Failure: Primary Results of the 
DAPA ACT HF-TIMI 68 Randomized Clinical Trial and Meta-Analysis of 
Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter-2 Inhibitors in Patients Hospitalized for Heart 
Failure.

Berg DD(1)(2), Patel SM(1)(2), Haller PM(1)(2)(3), Cange AL(1)(2), Palazzolo 
MG(1)(2), Bellavia A(1)(2), Kuder JF(1)(2), Desai AS(2), Inzucchi SE(4), 
McMurray JJV(5), O'Meara E(6), Verma S(7), Bělohlávek J(8)(9), Drożdż J(10), 
Merkely B(11), Ogunniyi MO(12), Drasnar T(13), Izzo JL(14), Sarman B(15), 
McGinty JE(16), Ramanathan K(17), Mulkay AJ(18), Przybylski A(19), Ruff 
CT(1)(2), O'Donoghue ML(1)(2), Murphy SA(1)(2), Sabatine MS(#)(1)(2), Wiviott 
SD(#)(2)(20); DAPA ACT HF-TIMI 68 Trial Committees and Investigators.

Author information:
(1)TIMI Study Group, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA (D.D.B., S.M.P., 
P.M.H., A.L.C., M.G.P., A.B., J.F.K., C.T.R., M.L.O., S.A.M., M.S.S.).
(2)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (D.D.B., S.M.P., P.M.H., A.L.C., 
M.G.P., A.B., J.F.K., A.S.D., C.T.R., M.L.O., S.A.M., M.S.S., S.D.W.).
(3)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany (P.M.H.).
(4)Section of Endocrinology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
(S.E.I.).
(5)British Heart Foundation Cardiovascular Research Centre, University of 
Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom (J.J.V.M.).
(6)Department of Cardiology, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada (E.O.).
(7)Division of Cardiac Surgery, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute of St. Michael's 
Hospital, Unity Health Toronto, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada (S.V.).
(8)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Cardiovascular Medicine, General 
University Hospital and First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, 
Czech Republic (J.B.).
(9)Institute for Heart Diseases, Wroclaw Medical University, Wrocław, Poland 
(J.B.).
(10)Department of Cardiology, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland (J.D.).
(11)Heart and Vascular Center, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary (B.M.).
(12)Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 
(M.O.O.).
(13)Slaný Municipal Hospital, Slaný, Czech Republic (T.D.).
(14)Jacobs School of Medicine, University at Buffalo, Erie County Medical 
Center, Buffalo, NY (J.L.I.).
(15)Department of Cardiology, Uzsoki Hospital, Budapest, Hungary (B.S.).
(16)Reid Health, Reid Physician Associates, Richmond, IN (J.E.M.).
(17)Department of Medicine, St Paul's Hospital and the University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada (K.R.).
(18)Holy Name Medical Center, Teaneck, NJ (A.J.M.).
(19)Kliniczny Szpital Wojewódzki nr 2 im. Św. Jadwigi Królowej w Rzeszowie; 
Kolegium Nauk Medycznych Uniwersytet Rzeszowski, Rzeszów, Poland (A.P.).
(20)Late-Stage Development, Cardiovascular, Renal and Metabolism 
BioPharmaceuticals Research and Development, AstraZeneca, Boston, MA (S.D.W.).
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: SGLT2 (sodium-glucose cotransporter-2) inhibitors reduce the risk of 
cardiovascular death or worsening heart failure (HF) in outpatients with HF. 
Data on initiation in patients hospitalized for HF are limited.
METHODS: We conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial 
evaluating the efficacy and safety of in-hospital initiation of dapagliflozin 
(10 mg daily) in patients hospitalized for HF. The primary efficacy outcome was 
a composite of time to cardiovascular death or worsening HF through 2 months. 
Key safety outcomes included symptomatic hypotension and worsening kidney 
function. A prespecified meta-analysis of randomized trials evaluating 
initiation of SGLT2 inhibitors in patients hospitalized for HF was performed.
RESULTS: Of 2401 patients (median age, 69 [Q1-Q3, 58-77] years, 815 [33.9%] 
women, 448 [18.7%] Black race, 1717 [71.5%] left ventricular ejection fraction 
≤40%, 1074 [44.7%] newly diagnosed HF) randomized between September 2020 and 
March 2025, 1218 were assigned to dapagliflozin and 1183 to placebo. The primary 
outcome occurred in 133 patients (10.9%) in the dapagliflozin group and 150 
(12.7%) in the placebo group (hazard ratio [HR], 0.86 [95% CI, 0.68-1.08]; 
P=0.20). A worsening HF event occurred in 115 (9.4%) and 122 (10.3%) patients in 
the dapagliflozin and placebo groups, respectively (HR, 0.91 [95% CI, 
0.71-1.18]). Cardiovascular death occurred in 30 (2.5%) and 37 (3.1%) patients 
(HR, 0.78 [95% CI, 0.48-1.27]), and death from any cause occurred in 36 (3.0%) 
and 53 (4.5%) patients in the dapagliflozin and placebo groups, respectively 
(HR, 0.66 [95% CI, 0.43-1.00]). The rates of symptomatic hypotension were 3.6% 
and 2.2%, and the rates of worsening kidney function were 5.9% and 4.7% with 
dapagliflozin and placebo, respectively. In a meta-analysis of patients 
hospitalized for HF, SGLT2 inhibitors reduced the early risk of cardiovascular 
death or worsening HF (HR, 0.71 [95% CI, 0.54-0.93] P=0.012) and of all-cause 
death (HR, 0.57 [95% CI, 0.41-0.80]; P=0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: In this trial, in-hospital initiation of dapagliflozin did not 
significantly reduce the risk of cardiovascular death or worsening HF through 2 
months in hospitalized HF patients. However, the totality of randomized clinical 
trial data suggests that in-hospital initiation of SGLT2 inhibitors may reduce 
the early risk of cardiovascular death or worsening HF and of all-cause 
mortality.
REGISTRATION: URL: https://www.clinicaltrials.gov; Unique identifier: 
NCT04363697.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.125.076575
PMCID: PMC12910484
PMID: 40884036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Berg, Dr Patel, Dr Haller, Ms Cange, Mr 
Palazzolo, Dr Bellavia, Ms Kuder, Dr Ruff, Dr O’Donoghue, Ms Murphy, and Dr 
Sabatine are members of the TIMI Study Group, which has received institutional 
research grant support through Brigham and Women’s Hospital from Abbott; 
Abiomed, Inc; Amgen; Anthos Therapeutics; ARCA Biopharma, Inc; AstraZeneca; 
Boehringer Ingelheim; Cleerly, Inc; Daiichi-Sankyo; Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Inc; 
Janssen Research and Development, LLC; MedImmune; Merck; Novartis; Pfizer; 
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc; Roche; Saghmos Therapeutics, Inc; Softcell 
Medical Limited; The Medicines Company; Verve Therapeutics, Inc; and Zora 
Biosciences. Dr Berg has received institutional research grant support through 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital from AstraZeneca, Merck, and Pfizer; consulting 
fees from AstraZeneca, Pfizer, Mobility Bio, and Youngene Therapeutics; and 
honoraria from the Metabolic Endocrine Education Foundation, Pri-Med, and USV 
Private Limited and has served on clinical end point committees for studies 
sponsored by Beckman Coulter, CeleCor Therapeutics, Kowa Pharmaceuticals, Novo 
Nordisk, and Tosoh Biosciences. Dr Patel is supported by a K12TR004381 award 
through Harvard Catalyst, The Harvard Clinical and Translational Science Center 
(National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of 
Health), and has received consultant advisory fees from Janssen. Dr Haller is 
funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research Foundation, 
10086/1-1) and has received travel grants from the German Center of 
Cardiovascular Research and project grants from the German Heart Foundation. Dr 
Bellavia has received consultancy fees from Arboretum LifeSciences and 
MarvelBiome and honoraria from Columbia University and BioEpiEdu. Dr Desai has 
received institutional research grants from Abbott, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Novartis, and Pfizer and personal consulting fees from 
Abbott, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Biofourmis, Boston 
Scientific, Endotronix, GlaxoSmithKline, iRhythm Technologies, Medpace, 
Medtronic, Merck, Novartis, Parexel, Porter Health, Regeneron, River 2 Renal, 
Roche, Veristat, Verily, and Zydus. Dr Inzucchi has received honoraria for 
consulting or clinical trial committee work from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Corcept, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, and Bayer and has given lectures 
sponsored by AstraZeneca and Boehringer Ingelheim. Dr McMurray has received 
payments to Glasgow University for clinical trials and other research projects 
from the National Institutes of Health National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Cardurion, Cytokinetics, Novartis, and Roche; 
personal consultancy fees from AnaCardio, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Cardurion, 
Cytokinetics, Novartis, River BioMedics, Biohaven Pharmaceuticals, RyCarma 
Therapeutics, Inc, Regeneron, and DalCor Pharmaceuticals; and personal lecture 
fees from Alkem Metabolics, AstraZeneca, Canadian Medical and Surgical Knowledge 
Translation Research Group, Centrix Healthcare, Emcure Pharmaceuticals, Eris 
Lifesciences, Hikma Pharmaceuticals, Imagica Health, Intas Pharmaceuticals, J.B. 
Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals, Lupin Pharmaceuticals, ProAdWise Communications, 
Radcliffe Cardiology, Sun Pharmaceuticals, Translational Medicine Academy, and 
Hilton Pharmaceuticals. He serves on the data safety monitoring board of WCG 
Clinical Services, and he is a director at Global Clinical Trial Partners (which 
provides clinical trial services such as end point committees and educational 
programs). Dr O’Meara holds the Montreal Heart Institute Carolyn and Richard J. 
Renaud chair for research in heart failure, with fees paid through her 
institution for this chair and fora Canadian Heart Function Alliance team grant, 
funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (steering committee 
member), and involvement as a steering committee member for DAPA ACT HF-TIMI 68 
(TIMI Study Group and AstraZeneca), GARDEN-TIMI 74 (TIMI Study Group and 
Pfizer), HEART-FID (American Regent), CARDINAL-HF (Cardurion), HERMES (National 
Lead Investigator, Novo Nordisk), and BalancedD-HF (NLI, AstraZeneca). She has 
received consulting fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bayer, 
Novartis, and Novo Nordisk and speaker fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, and Pfizer. Dr Verma has 
received research grants or speaking honoraria from Amarin, Amgen, AstraZeneca, 
Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, the Canadian Medical and Surgical Knowledge 
Translation Research Group, Eli Lilly, HLS Therapeutics, Janssen, Novartis, Novo 
Nordisk, Pfizer, PhaseBio, S&L Solutions Event Management, and Sanofi. Dr 
Bělohlávek has received lecture honoraria from Novartis, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Getinge, Abiomed, and Resuscitec. Dr Drożdż has received research 
grants from AstraZeneca and lecture fees from Celon Pharma, Merck, Novo Nordisk, 
and Servier Poland. Dr Merkely has received payments for lectures or studies 
from Boehringer Ingelheim, Daiichi Sankyo, the Duke Clinical Research Institute, 
and Novartis and reports grants through his institution from Biotronik, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, the Duke Clinical Research Institute, Eli Lilly, and 
Novartis. Dr Ogunniyi has received institutional research grant support from 
AstraZeneca and Pfizer and serves on a clinical trial steering committee for 
Novartis. Dr Izzo reports payments from AstraZeneca, Cardurion, Mineralys, and 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital. Dr Ruff has received research grant support 
through his institution from Anthos, AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Janssen, and 
Novartis and honoraria for scientific advisory boards and consulting from 
Anthos, Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Daiichi Sankyo, Janssen, and Pfizer. Dr 
O’Donoghue reports grants to the TIMI Study Group through her institution from 
Amgen, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Merck, and Janssen Medicines Company; consulting 
or DSMB fees from Amgen, Novartis, Janssen, AstraZeneca, and CRICO; and 
honoraria from Medscape Cardiology. Dr Sabatine has received research grant 
support through Brigham and Women’s Hospital from Abbott; Amgen; Anthos 
Therapeutics, Inc; AstraZeneca; Boehringer Ingelheim; Daiichi-Sankyo; Ionis; 
Marea; Merck; Novartis; Pfizer; Saghmos Therapeutics; and Verve Therapeutics and 
consulting fees from Amgen; AMPEL BioSolutions; Anthos Therapeutics, Inc; 
AstraZeneca; Beren Therapeutics; Boehringer Ingelheim; CCRN; Dr Reddy’s 
Laboratories; General Medicines; Merck; NATF; Novo Nordisk; and Precision 
BioSciences. Dr Wiviott has received research grants from Amgen, AstraZeneca, 
Janssen, Merck, and Pfizer; consulting fees from Icon, Novo Nordisk, and Verian; 
and speaking honoraria from Harvard Medical School. As of June 16, 2025, Dr 
Wiviott is employed by AstraZeneca. Dr Wiviott’s wife, Dr Caroline Fox, has been 
employed by Vertex Pharmaceuticals and Pfizer.


2. JAMA. 2026 Jan 20;335(3):233-244. doi: 10.1001/jama.2025.20834.

SGLT2 Inhibitors and Kidney Outcomes by Glomerular Filtration Rate and 
Albuminuria: A Meta-Analysis.

Neuen BL(1)(2), Fletcher RA(1)(3), Anker SD(4), Bhatt DL(5), Butler J(6), 
Cherney DZI(7), Docherty KF(8), Inzucchi SE(9), Jardine MJ(10), Mahaffey KW(11), 
McCausland FR(12), McGuire DK(13), McMurray JJV(8), Neal B(1)(14), Packer 
M(14)(15), Patel SM(16), Perkovic V(1), Sabatine MS(16), Sardell RJ(17), Solomon 
SD(12), Vaduganathan M(12), Wanner C(17)(18), Wheeler DC(19), Zannad F(20), 
Haynes R(17)(21), Staplin N(17), Herrington WG(17)(21), Heerspink HJL(1)(22); 
SGLT2 Inhibitor Meta-Analysis Cardio-Renal Trialists’ Consortium (SMART-C).

Collaborators: Neuen BL, Heerspink HJ, Anker SD, Bhatt DL, Butler J, Cherney DZ, 
Docherty KF, Hernandez AF, Herrington WG, Inzucchi SE, James S, Jardine MJ, 
Mahaffey KW, McGuire DK, McMurray JJ, Neal B, Packer M, Patel SM, Perkovic V, 
Sabatine MS, Staplin N, Solomon SD, Vaduganathan M, Wanner C, Wheeler DC, Zannad 
F.

Author information:
(1)The George Institute for Global Health, University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(2)Department of Renal Medicine, Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(3)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, British Heart Foundation 
Cardiovascular Epidemiology Unit and Victor Phillip Dahdaleh Heart and Lung 
Research Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Cardiology (CVK) of German Heart Center Charité, Institute of 
Health Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), German Centre for 
Cardiovascular Research (DZHK) partner site Berlin, Charité Universitätsmedizin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(5)Mount Sinai Heart, New York, New York.
(6)Baylor Scott and White Research Institute, Temple, Texas.
(7)Toronto General Research Institute, University Health Network, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)School of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Health, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(9)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
(10)NHMRC Clinical Trials Centre, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(11)Stanford Center for Clinical Research, Department of Medicine, Stanford 
University, Stanford, California.
(12)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(13)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas.
(14)Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(15)Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.
(16)TIMI Study Group, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(17)Renal Studies Group, Clinical Trial Service Unit and Epidemiological Studies 
Unit, Nuffield Department of Population Health (NDPH), University of Oxford, 
Oxford, United Kingdom.
(18)University Hospital of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(19)Department of Renal Medicine, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(20)Université de Lorraine, Inserm and CHRU de Nancy, Vandœuvre-lès-Nancy, 
France.
(21)Oxford Kidney Unit, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Oxford, United Kingdom.
(22)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2026 Jan 20;335(3):217-219. doi: 10.1001/jama.2025.21336.

IMPORTANCE: Sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors reduce chronic 
kidney disease (CKD) progression in individuals with type 2 diabetes, CKD, or 
heart failure. However, their effects in those with stage 4 CKD or little to no 
albuminuria remain uncertain.
OBJECTIVE: To assess whether estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) or 
degree of albuminuria, measured by urinary albumin to creatinine ratio (UACR), 
modifies the effects of SGLT2 inhibitors on kidney outcomes.
DATA SOURCES: SGLT2 inhibitor trials participating in the SGLT2 Inhibitor 
Meta-Analysis Cardio-Renal Trialists' Consortium (SMART-C).
STUDY SELECTION: Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials within 
SMART-C evaluating an SGLT2 inhibitor with label indications for reducing CKD 
progression including at least 500 participants in each group with at least 6 
months of follow-up.
DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Treatment effects in individual trials were 
pooled using inverse variance-weighted meta-analysis.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: CKD progression, defined as kidney failure, at least 
50% reduction in eGFR, or death due to kidney failure. Other outcomes included 
annual rate of eGFR decline and kidney failure.
RESULTS: Among 70 361 participants (mean [SD] age, 64.8 [8.7] years; 24 595 
[35.0%] females) in 10 randomized trials, 2314 (3.3%) experienced CKD 
progression and 988 (1.4%) reached kidney failure. SGLT2 inhibitors reduced the 
risk of CKD progression (25.4 vs 40.3 events per 1000 patient-years; hazard 
ratio [HR], 0.62 [95% CI, 0.57-0.68]), irrespective of baseline eGFR (HR of 0.61 
[95% CI, 0.52-0.71] for eGFR ≥60 mL/min/1.73 m2; 0.57 [95% CI, 0.47-0.70] for 
eGFR of 45 to <60 mL/min/1.73 m2; 0.64 [95% CI, 0.54-0.75] for eGFR of 30 to <45 
mL/min/1.73 m2; and 0.71 [95% CI, 0.60-0.83] for eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2; P for 
trend = .16) and baseline albuminuria (HR of 0.58 [95% CI, 0.44-0.76] for 
albuminuria ≤30 mg/g; 0.74 [95% CI, 0.57-0.96] for >30-300 mg/g; and 0.57 [95% 
CI, 0.52-0.64] for more than 300 mg/g; P for trend = .49). Although the 
magnitude of protection varied, SGLT2 inhibitors reduced the annual rate of eGFR 
decline across all eGFR and UACR subgroups, including when participants with and 
without diabetes were analyzed separately. SGLT2 inhibitors also reduced the 
risk of kidney failure alone (HR, 0.66 [95% CI, 0.58-0.75]).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this meta-analysis, SGLT2 inhibitors were found to 
lower the risk of CKD progression regardless of baseline eGFR or albuminuria, 
including in patients with stage 4 CKD or minimal albuminuria, supporting their 
routine use to improve kidney outcomes across the full spectrum of kidney 
function among patients with type 2 diabetes, CKD, or heart failure.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2025.20834
PMCID: PMC12595549
PMID: 41203232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Neuen 
reported receiving personal fees from AstraZeneca, Alexion, Bayer, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Cornerstone Medical Education, Menarini, MJH Life Sciences, Janssen, 
Limbic, Medscape, Novo Nordisk, Otsuka, Travere, and Vera Therapeutics outside 
the submitted work. Dr Fletcher reported the receipt of studentship awards from 
the HDR-UK-Turing Wellcome Programme in Health Data Science. Dr Anker reported 
receiving grants from Gran CSL/Vifor & Abbott Laboratories and personal fees 
from Actimed, Alleviant, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Berlin Heals, BiMyo, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Brahms, Cardiac Dimensions, Cardior, Cordio, Corvia, CVRx, 
Cytokinetics, Edwards, Impulse Dynamics, Lilly, Mankind Pharma, Novo Nordisk, 
Occlutech, Pfizer, Regeneron, Relaxera, Repairon, Scirent, Sensible Medical, 
Vectorious, Veru, Vivus, and V-Wave outside the submitted work and being named 
co-inventor of 2 patent applications regarding MR-proANP (DE 102007010834 & DE 
102007022367) issued to Brahms GmbH. Dr Bhatt reported receiving grants from 
Lexicon, Boehringer Ingelheim, and AstraZeneca outside the submitted work and 
having a patent for sotagliflozin pending assigned to Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital who assigned to Lexicon; and serving on an advisory board for 
Angiowave, Antlia Bioscience, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, CellProthera, Cereno 
Scientific, E-Star Biotech, High Enroll, Janssen, Level Ex, McKinsey, Medscape 
Cardiology, Merck, NirvaMed, Novo Nordisk, Repair Biotechnologies, Stasys, 
Tourmaline Bio; the board of directors for American Heart Association New York 
City, Angiowave (stock options), Bristol Myers Squibb (stock), DRS.LINQ (stock 
options), and High Enroll (stock); consulting for Alnylam, Altimmune, Broadview 
Ventures, Corcept Therapeutics, Corsera, GlaxoSmithKline, Hims, SERB, SFJ, Summa 
Therapeutics, and Worldwide Clinical Trials; serving on data and safety 
monitoring committees for Acesion Pharma, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 
Baim Institute for Clinical Research, Boston Scientific (Chair, PEITHO trial), 
Cleveland Clinic, Contego Medical (Chair, PERFORMANCE 2), Duke Clinical Research 
Institute, Mayo Clinic, Mount Sinai School of Medicine (for the ABILITY-DM 
trial, funded by Concept Medical; for ALLAY-HF, funded by Alleviant Medical), 
Novartis, and Population Health Research Institute; Rutgers University (for the 
NIH-funded MINT Trial); receiving honoraria from American College of Cardiology 
(Senior Associate Editor, Clinical Trials and News, ACC.org; Chair, ACC 
Accreditation Oversight Committee), Arnold and Porter law firm (work related to 
Sanofi/Bristol Myers Squibb clopidogrel litigation), Baim Institute for Clinical 
Research (AEGIS-II executive committee funded by CSL Behring), Belvoir 
Publications (editor in chief, Harvard Heart Letter), Canadian Medical and 
Surgical Knowledge Translation Research Group (clinical trial steering 
committees), CSL Behring (AHA lecture), Duke Clinical Research Institute, Engage 
Health Media, HMP Global (editor in chief, Journal of Invasive Cardiology), 
Medtelligence/ReachMD (CME steering committees), MJH Life Sciences, Oakstone CME 
(Course Director, Comprehensive Review of Interventional Cardiology), Philips 
(Becker’s Webinar on AI), Population Health Research Institute, WebMD (CME 
steering committees), and Wiley (steering committee); serving as deputy editor 
of Clinical Cardiology and Progress in Cardiovascular Diseases; being named on a 
patent for sotagliflozin assigned to Brigham and Women’s Hospital who assigned 
to Lexicon; receiving research funding from Abbott, Acesion Pharma, Afimmune, 
Alnylam, Amarin, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Atricure, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Boston Scientific, CellProthera, Cereno Scientific, Chiesi, Cleerly, CSL 
Behring, Faraday Pharmaceuticals, Fractyl, Idorsia, Janssen, Javelin, Lexicon, 
Lilly, Medtronic, Merck, MiRUS, Moderna, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, 
PhaseBio, Regeneron, Reid Hoffman Foundation, Roche, Sanofi, Stasys, and 89Bio; 
and receiving royalties from Elsevier. Dr Butler reported receiving personal 
fees from consulting for Abbott, Adaptyx, American Regent, Amgen, AskBio, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Boston Scientific, Bristol Myers 
Squibb, Cardiac Dimension, Cardior, CSL Vifor, CVRx, Cytokinetics, Daxor, 
Diastol, Edwards, Element Sciences, Faraday, Idorsia, Impulse Dynamics, Imbria, 
Innolife, Intellia, Inventiva, Levator, Lexicon, Eli Lilly, Mankind, Medtronic, 
Merck, New Amsterdam, Novartis, NovoNordisk, Pfizer, Pharmacosmos, Pharmain, 
Prolaio, Pulnovo, Regeneron, Renibus, Reprieve, Roche, Rycarma, Saillent, 
Salamandra, Salubris, SC Pharma, SQ Innovation, Secretome, Sequanna, Transmural, 
TekkunLev, Tenex, Tricog, Ultromic, Vera, and Zoll outside the submitted work. 
Dr Cherney reported receiving honoraria from Boehringer Ingelheim-Lilly, Merck, 
AstraZeneca, Sanofi, Mitsubishi-Tanabe, AbbVie, Janssen, AMGEN, Bayer, Prometic, 
BMS, Maze, Gilead, CSL-Behring, Otsuka, Novartis, Youngene, Lexicon, Inversago, 
GSK, Biobridge, Vantage, Altimmune and Novo Nordisk and grants from Boehringer 
Ingelheim-Lilly, Merck, Janssen, Sanofi, AstraZeneca, CSL-Behring, Lexicon, Novo 
Nordisk, and Bayer during the conduct of the study and honoraria from Boehringer 
Ingelheim-Lilly, Merck, AstraZeneca, Sanofi, Mitsubishi-Tanabe, AbbVie, Janssen, 
AMGEN, Bayer, Prometic, BMS, Maze, Gilead, CSL-Behring, Otsuka, Novartis, 
Youngene, Lexicon, Inversago, GSK, Biobridge, Vantage, Altimmune, and Novo 
Nordisk and grants from Boehringer Ingelheim-Lilly, Merck, Janssen, Sanofi, 
AstraZeneca, CSL-Behring, Lexicon, Novo Nordisk, and Bayer outside the submitted 
work. Dr Docherty reported being remunerated by AstraZeneca for time spent 
working on clinical trials, personal fees from Bayer (advisory board fees and 
clinical end point adjudication committee), other from AstraZeneca (research 
grant paid to institution), other from Boehringer Ingelheim (research grant paid 
to institution), other from Roche Diagnostics (research grant paid to 
institution), personal fees from Abbott (advisory board fees), other from FIRE-1 
(member of clinical trial committee), personal fees from AstraZeneca (speaker 
fees), personal fees from Radcliffe Cardiology (speaker fees), and personal fees 
from Translational Medicine Academy (speaker fees) outside the submitted work. 
Dr Inzucchi reported receiving personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
AstraZeneca, Novo Nordisk, and Bayer outside the submitted work. Dr Jardine 
reported being supported by an Australian government National Health and Medical 
Research Council investigator grant; being responsible for research projects 
that have received unrestricted funding from Amgen, Baxter, CSL, Eli Lilly, 
Gambro, and MSD; serving on advisory boards sponsored by Akebia, Astra Zeneca, 
Baxter, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Occuryx, and Vifor; 
serving on steering committees for trials sponsored by Chinook, CSL, Janssen and 
Boehringer Ingelheim; receiving funding support for an investigator-initiated 
trial from Dimerix, Kensana; speaking at scientific meetings sponsored by Amgen, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Janssen, Novo Nordisk, Roche, and Vifor; receiving fees 
for educational activities from Cesas Medical, Medcon International PACE CME, 
and Medscape; and providing consultancy or receiving honoraria or travel support 
directed to her institution from Amgen, Baxter, CSL, Eli Lilly, Gambro, and MSD 
outside the submitted work. Dr Mahaffey reported receiving personal fees from 
Eli Lilly and Johnson & Johnson and grants from Johnson & Johnson outside the 
submitted work. Dr McCausland reported receiving research fees from Novartis, 
Lexicon, AstraZeneca, and NIH paid directly to his institution; consulting fees 
from Aquapass, GSK, and Zydus Therapeutics; expert witness fees from 
Rubin-Anders Scientific; travel/speakers fees from Bayer and Global Learning 
Collaborative; serving on a data and safety monitoring board for AstraZeneca; 
and spousal consulting fees from Vera Therapeutics and Alexion outside the 
submitted work. Dr McGuire reported receiving personal fees from Novo Nordisk, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Lilly, Lexicon, Amgen, Neurotronic, Kailera, 
Alveus, Regor, Roche Genentech, Amsterdam, Metsera, and Novartis outside the 
submitted work. Dr McMurray reported receiving payment to Glasgow University 
from British Heart Foundation, National Institutes of Health/National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood Institute, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Cardurion, Cytokinetics, 
Novartis, and Roche Diagnostics; personal fees for consulting from Alynylam 
Pharmaceuticals, AnaCardio, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Cardurion, Cytokinetics, 
Novartis, River BioMedics, Biohaven Pharmaceuticals, DalCor Pharmaceuticals; 
personal lecture fees from Alkem Metabolics, AstraZeneca, Canadian Medical and 
Surgical Knowledge, Centrix Healthcare, Emcure Pharmaceuticals, Eris 
Lifesciences, Hikma Pharmaceuticals, Imagica Health, Intas Pharmaceuticals, J.B. 
Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals, Lupin Pharmaceuticals, Medscape/Heart.Org, 
ProAdWise Communications, Radcliffe Cardiology, Sun Pharmaceuticals, 
Translational Medicine Academy, Regeneron, MCI India, Hilton Pharmaceuticals, 
IMEDIC Pharmaceuticals Micro Labs Ltd, ARMGO Pharmaceuticals; and serving as 
director of Global Clinical Trial Partners outside the submitted work. Dr Neal 
reported receiving grants for funding support for the CANVAS and CREDENCE trials 
from Janssen Pharmaceuticals paid to the institution during the conduct of the 
study. Dr Packer reported receiving personal fees from 89bio, AbbVie, Actavis, 
Alnylam, Ardelyx, ARMGO, Attralus, AstraZeneca, Altimmune, Amgen, Biopeutics, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Caladrius, Casana, CSL Behring, Cytokinetics, Daiichi 
Sankyo, Imara, Lilly, Medtronic, Moderna, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pharmacosmos, 
Regeneron, Salamandra, and V-Wave outside the submitted work. Dr Patel reported 
receiving grants from AstraZeneca for statistical support during the conduct of 
the study and grants from Anthos Therapeutics/Novartis and grants from Harvard 
Catalyst/The Harvard Clinical and Translational Science Center (National Center 
for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health) award 
(K12TR004381) outside the submitted work; and being a member of the TIMI Study 
Group, which has received institutional research grant support through Brigham 
and Women’s Hospital from Abbott, Abiomed, Inc, Amgen, Anthos Therapeutics, ARCA 
Biopharma Inc, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Cleerly Inc, Daiichi Sankyo, 
Ionis Pharmaceuticals Inc, Janssen Research and Development LLC, MedImmune, 
Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc, Roche, Saghmos 
Therapeutics Inc, Softcell Medical Limited, The Medicines Company, Verve 
Therapeutics, Inc, and Zora Biosciences. Dr Perkovic reported receiving personal 
fees from AstraZeneca, Bayer, Biogen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chinook, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Guard Therapeutics, Incyte, Janssen, Mineralys, Novo Nordisk, 
Novartis, Otsuka, Shanxi Micot, Travere, Tricida, and Vifor outside the 
submitted work. Dr Sabatine reported receiving grants from AstraZeneca to the 
TIMI Study Group at Brigham and Women’s Hospital and personal fees from 
AstraZeneca during the conduct of the study and grants to the TIMI Study Group 
at Brigham and Women’s Hospital from Abbott and Amgen; personal fees from Amgen, 
AMPEL BioSolutions, Anthos Therapeutics, Beren Therapeutics, CCRN (Canadian CV 
Research Network), Dr Reddy’s Laboratories, General Medicines, Merck, NATF 
(North American Thrombosis Forum), Novo Nordisk, and Precision BioSciences and 
institutional research grants to the TIMI Study Group at Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital from Anthos Therapeutics, Boehringer Ingelheim, Daiichi Sankyo, IONIS, 
Marea, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Saghmos Therapeutics, and Verve Therapeutics 
outside the submitted work; and being a member of the TIMI Study Group, which 
has also received institutional research grant support through Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital from Abiomed Inc, ARCA Biopharma Inc, Cleerly Inc, Janssen 
Research and Development LLC, MedImmune, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc, Roche, 
Softcell Medical Limited, The Medicines Company, and Zora Biosciences. Dr 
Solomon reported receiving grants from Alexion, Alnylam, Applied Therapeutics, 
AstraZeneca, Bellerophon, Bayer, BMS, Boston Scientific, Cardior, Cytokinetics, 
Edgewise, BridgeBio, Gossamer, GSK, Ionis, Lilly, NIH/NHLBI, Novartis, Novo 
Nordisk, Respicardia, Sanofi Pasteur, Tenaya, Theracos, US2.AI and personal fees 
from Abbott, Action, Akros, Alexion, Alnylam, Amgen, Arena, Askbio, AstraZeneca, 
Bayer, BMS, Bridgebio, Cardior, Cardurion, Corvia, Cytokinetics, GSK, Intellia, 
Lilly, Novartis, Roche, Theracos, Quantum Genomics, Tenaya, Sanofi-Pasteur, 
Dinaqor, Tremeau, CellProThera, Moderna, American Regent, Sarepta, Lexicon, 
Anacardio, Akros, Valo, Synhale, and Recordati outside the submitted work. Dr 
Vaduganathan reported receiving personal fees from Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, 
American Regent, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer AG, Baxter Healthcare, BMS, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cytokinetics, Esperion, Fresenius Medical Care, 
Idorsia Pharmaceuticals, Lexicon Pharmaceuticals, Merck, Milestone 
Pharmaceuticals, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pharmacosmos, Recordati, Relypsa, Roche 
Diagnostics, Sanofi, and Tricog Health for serving as a consultant or advisory 
board member and personal fees from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer AG, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Galmed, Impulse Dynamics, Novartis, Occlutech, and Pharmacosmos for 
serving on clinical trial committees outside the submitted work. Dr Wanner 
reported receiving personal fees from companies similar to the companion SMART-C 
paper during the conduct of the study. Dr Wheeler reported receiving 
nonfinancial support from AstraZeneca and Boehringer Ingelheim Travel during the 
conduct of the study and personal fees from Bayer, CSL, GSK, Menarini, Pathalys, 
ProKidney, Purespring, Merck, Vifor, Medice, and Vertex outside the submitted 
work. Dr Zannad reported receiving personal fees from Boehringer during the 
conduct of the study and personal fees from Acceleron, Alnylam, Bayer, 
Biopeutics, Boehringer, Cambrian, Cellprothera, Centrix, Cereno pharmaceutical, 
Corteria, CRISPR Therapeutics, CVRx, CVCT, Daiichi Sankyo, Eshmoun, eSpace, 
G3Pharmaceutical, Inventiva, HighTide, KBP, Lilly, Lupin, Merck, NovoNordisk, 
Opalia Recordati, Otsuka, Owkin, Polygon, Ribocure, Roche, Viatris, and 
Vivek-India outside the submitted work and Equities in G3Pharmaceutical, Cereno 
pharmaceutical, and Eshmoun. Dr Haynes reported receiving grants to the 
institution from Boehringer Ingelheim and Lilly To institution during the 
conduct of the study. Dr Staplin reported receiving grants paid to the 
institution from Boehringer Ingelheim Eli Lilly and Company, and Novo Nordisk 
outside the submitted work. Dr Herrington reported receiving grants from 
Boehringer Ingelheim and grants from Eli Lilly during the conduct of the study. 
Dr Heerspink reported receiving honoraria to the institution from AstraZeneca 
and Janssen during the conduct of the study and grants paid to the institution 
from Bayer and Boehringer Ingelheim and honoraria from Amgen, Alexion, Biocity, 
Eli Lilly, Dimerix, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Roche, and Travere outside the 
submitted work. No other disclosures were reported.


3. ESC Heart Fail. 2025 Dec;12(6):3806-3825. doi: 10.1002/ehf2.15408. Epub 2025 Sep 
19.

SGLT2 inhibitors for the prevention and treatment of heart failure: A scientific 
statement of the HFA and the HFAI.

Metra M(1), Tomasoni D(1)(2), Adamo M(1), Amir O(3), Anker SD(4), Bayes-Genis 
A(5), Boehm M(6), Butler J(7)(8), Chioncel O(9), Filippatos G(10), Gustafsson 
F(11), Jankowska EA(12), Kaski JC(13), Moura B(14)(15), Petrie MC(16), 
Ponikowski P(12)(17), Rakisheva A(18), Ristic A(19), Roubille F(20), Savarese 
G(2), Seferovic P(21), van der Meer P(22), Volterrani M(23), Coats AJ(24), 
Chopra VK(25), Rosano G(26)(27).

Author information:
(1)Cardiology. ASST Spedali Civili di Brescia and Department of Medical and 
Surgical Specialties, Radiological Sciences, and Public Health, University of 
Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical Science and Education, Södersjukhuset, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Hadassah Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, 
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)Department of Cardiology (CVK) of German Heart Center Charité, German Centre 
for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK) partner site Berlin, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Heart Institute, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, 
CIBERCV, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Klinik für Innere Medizin III, Universitätsklinikum des Saarlandes, Saarland 
University, Homburg, Germany.
(7)Baylor Scott & White Research Institute, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(8)University of Mississippi, Jackson, Mississippi, USA.
(9)Emergency Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases 'Prof. C.C. Iliescu', 
University of Medicine Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania.
(10)School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, 
Greece.
(11)Department of Cardiology, The Heart Centre, Rigshospitalet, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(12)Institute of Heart Diseases, Wrocław Medical University, Wrocław, Poland.
(13)Molecular and Clinical Sciences Research Institute, St George's University 
of London, London, UK.
(14)Centro de Investigação em Tecnologias e Serviços de Saúde, Porto, Portugal.
(15)Serviço de Cardiologia, Hospital das Forças Armadas-Pólo do Porto, Porto, 
Portugal.
(16)School of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Health, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, UK.
(17)Department of Cardiology, Wrocław Medical University, Wrocław, Poland.
(18)Department of Cardiology, Scientific Institution of Cardiology and Internal 
Diseases, Almaty, Kazakhstan.
(19)School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(20)PhyMedExp, Université de Montpellier, INSERM, CNRS, Cardiology Department, 
CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(21)Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Belgrade, Serbia.
(22)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(23)Department of Medical Sciences, Centre for Clinical and Basic Research, 
IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Rome, Italy.
(24)Heart Research Institute, Newtown, New South Wales, Australia.
(25)Department of Cardiology, Medanta, Gurgaon, Haryana, India.
(26)Department of Human Sciences and Promotion of Quality of Life, San Raffaele 
Open University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(27)IRCCS San Raffaele, Rome, Italy.

In the 2021 European Society of Cardiology (ESC) heart failure (HF) guidelines, 
sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors were recommended for the 
prevention of HF in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and for the 
treatment of HF with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). Further trials showed 
efficacy of empagliflozin and dapagliflozin in patients with HF with preserved 
ejection fraction (HFpEF). These results prompted a broadened recommendation for 
the SGLT2 inhibitors dapagliflozin or empagliflozin across the whole left 
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) spectrum in the 2023 Focused Update of the 
ESC HF guidelines and in other international guidelines. In SOLOIST-WHF and 
EMPULSE, sotagliflozin (enrolling only patients with T2DM) and empagliflozin, 
respectively, were beneficial when initiated at the end or soon after an episode 
of decompensated HF. Based on these results and on the early appearance of their 
beneficial effects, the administration of SGLT2 inhibitors should start early in 
patients hospitalized for acute HF. Analyses after study drug withdrawal in 
randomized clinical trials have shown that their benefits may decline rapidly 
after discontinuation, and thus, persistence of treatment is advised. In 
EMPACT-MI, empagliflozin did not reduce the primary outcome of cardiovascular 
(CV) death/HF hospitalization but reduced first/recurrent HF hospitalizations. 
Potential benefits of SGLT2 inhibitors in further specific conditions (i.e., 
cardiac amyloidosis, grown-up congenital heart disease and paediatric patients 
with HF) have been reported in observational studies but need confirmation from 
prospective trials. This scientific statement summarizes current evidence 
regarding the effects of SGLT2 inhibitors for the prevention and treatment of 
HF.

© 2025 The Author(s). ESC Heart Failure published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1002/ehf2.15408
PMCID: PMC12719827
PMID: 40968746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.M. reports personal consulting honoraria of 
minimal amount from Abbott, Amgen, Bayer, Edwards Lifesciences, LivaNova and 
Vifor Pharma for participation in advisory board meetings and executive 
committees of clinical trials outside the submitted work. D.T. reports speaker 
fees and honoraria of minimal amount from Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Pfizer and Roche Diagnostics outside the submitted work. 
M.A. reports speaker fees from Abbott and Medtronic outside the submitted work. 
O.A. reports consulting fees from Sensible Medical Innovations Ltd. S.D.A. 
reports grants and personal fees from Vifor and Abbott and personal fees for 
consultancies, trial committee work and/or lectures from Actimed, Amgen, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, BioVentrix, Brahms, Cardiac 
Dimensions, Cardior, Cordio, CVRx, Cytokinetics, Edwards Lifesciences, Faraday 
Pharmaceuticals, GSK, HeartKinetics, Impulse Dynamics, Novartis, Occlutech, 
Pfizer, Repairon, Sensible Medical, Servier, Vectorious and V‐Wave and was named 
co‐inventor of two patent applications regarding MR‐proANP (DE 102007010834 and 
DE 102007022367), but he does not benefit personally from the related issued 
patents. A.B‐.G. has received speaker honoraria and/or consulting for 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Roche Diagnostics and Vifor. 
M.B. is supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research 
Foundation; TTR 219, Project Number 322900939) and reports personal fees from 
Abbott, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Cytokinetics, 
Medtronic, Novartis, Recor Medical, Servier and Vifor. J.B. consulting honoraria 
from Abbott, American Regent, Amgen, Applied Therapeutic, AskBio, Astellas, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Boston Scientific, Bristol Myers 
Squibb, Cardiac Dimensions, Cardiocell, Cardior, CSL Bearing, CVRx, 
Cytokinetics, Daxor, Edwards Lifesciences, Element Science, Faraday 
Pharmaceuticals, Foundry, G3P, Innolife, Impulse Dynamics, Imbria, Inventiva, 
Ionis, Lexicon, Lilly, LivaNova, Janssen, Medtronic, Merck, Occlutech, Owkin, 
Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pharmacosmos, Pharmain, Pfizer, Prolaio, Regeneron, 
Renibus, Roche, Salamandra, Sanofi, SC Pharma, Secretome, Sequana, SQ 
Innovation, Tenex, Tricog, Ultromics, Vifor and Zoll outside the submitted work. 
O.C. reports Servier travel support for ESC Congress. G.F. reports lecture fees 
and/or committee member contributions in clinical trials sponsored by Bayer, 
Medtronic, Vifor, Servier, Novartis, Amgen and Boehringer Ingelheim and research 
support from the European Union. F.G. reports consulting fees for Bayer, Alnylam 
Pharmaceuticals, Ionis, Pfizer and Abbott and speaker fees from AstraZeneca, 
Novartis and Orion Pharma. E.A.J. reports research grants and personal fees from 
Vifor Pharma and personal fees from Bayer, Novartis, Abbott, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Pfizer, Servier, AstraZeneca, Berlin Chemie, Cardiac Dimensions, 
Takeda and Gedeon Richter. J.C.K. reports speaker honoraria from Menarini and 
Servier UK. B.M. reports advisory or speakers fees from AstraZeneca, Bayer, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Novartis, Servier, Vifor Pharma, Menarini and 
Merck Serono. M.C.P. reports research grants from SQ Innovation, AstraZeneca, 
Roche, Boehringer Ingelheim, Pharmacosmos, Eli Lilly, Napp Pharmaceuticals, 
Novartis and Novo Nordisk; has served on committees for AbbVie, Akero, Alnylam 
Pharmaceuticals, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Resverlogix, Teikoku, New Amsterdam and Novo Nordisk; and is a director of 
Global Clinical Trial Partners. P.P. has received consulting fees from 
Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Vifor Pharma, Amgen, Servier, Novartis, 
Bayer, MSD, Pfizer, Cibiem, Impulse Dynamics, RenalGuard Solutions and BMS and 
honoraria from Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Vifor Pharma, Amgen, Servier, 
Novartis, Berlin Chemie, Bayer, Pfizer, Impulse Dynamics, RenalGuard Solutions, 
BMS and Abbott for lectures, presentations, speakers' bureaus, manuscript 
writing or educational events. Amina Rakisheva reports speaker honoraria fees 
from Bayer, Pfizer and Roche. F.R. received consulting fees from Air Liquide 
Santé International. G.S. reports grants and personal fees from Vifor, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Cytokinetics and Pharmacosmos; 
personal fees from Medtronic, Servier, TEVA, Edwards Lifesciences and INTAS; and 
grants from Boston Scientific, Merck and Bayer outside the submitted work. 
P.v.d.M. is supported by a grant from the European Research Council (ERC CoG 
101045236, DISSECT‐HF). The UMCG, which employs PvdM, received consultancy fees 
and/or grants from Novartis, Pharmacosmos, Vifor Pharma, AstraZeneca, Pfizer, 
Pharma Nord, BridgeBio, Novo Nordisk, Daiichi Sankyo, Boehringer Ingelheim and 
Ionis. A.J.C. reports honoraria and/or lecture fees from AstraZeneca, Bayer, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Edwards Lifesciences, Menarini, Novartis, Servier, Vifor, 
Abbott, Actimed, Arena, Cardiac Dimensions, Corvia, CVRx, Enopace, ESN Cleer, 
Faraday Pharmaceuticals, Impulse Dynamics, Respicardia and Viatris outside the 
submitted work. G.R. is supported by the Italian Ministry of Health (Ricerca 
Corrente). All other authors report no conflicts of interest.


4. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2025 Dec 16;86(24):2513-2526. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2025.08.054. Epub 2025 Aug 30.

Pharmacologic Treatment of Heart Failure With Reduced Ejection Fraction: An 
Updated Systematic Review and Network Meta-Analysis.

van Essen BJ(1), Ceelen DCH(1), Ouwerkerk W(2), Teng TK(3), Tharshana GN(4), Hew 
FM(4), Butler J(5), Zannad F(6), Lam CS(7), Ezekowitz J(8), Voors AA(1), Tromp 
J(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam 
Infection & Immunity Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; National Heart 
Centre Singapore, Singapore.
(3)National Heart Centre Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University of Singapore & the 
National University Health System, Singapore.
(5)Baylor Scott and White Research Institute, Dallas, Texas, USA; University of 
Mississippi, Jackson, Mississippi, USA.
(6)Université de Lorraine INSERM, Centre d'Investigations Cliniques 
Plurithématique, CHRU Nancy, France.
(7)National Heart Centre Singapore, Singapore; Duke-NUS Medical School, 
Singapore; Baim Institute of Clinical Research, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(8)University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(9)Department of Cardiology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands; National Heart Centre Singapore, 
Singapore; Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University of 
Singapore & the National University Health System, Singapore; Duke-NUS Medical 
School, Singapore. Electronic address: Jasper_tromp@nus.edu.sg.

BACKGROUND: In 2022, a network meta-analysis showed that a combination of 
β-blockers, angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitors (ARNi), mineralocorticoid 
receptor antagonists (MRAs), and sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors 
(SGLT2i) was most effective in reducing all-cause mortality in heart failure 
with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). This study updates the treatment benefit 
by including additional large randomized controlled trials (RCTs) since 2022, 
including the VICTOR (Vericiguat Global Study in Participants with Chronic Heart 
Failure) trial.
OBJECTIVES: The goal of this study was to evaluate and compare regimens of 
pharmacotherapy in patients with HFrEF.
METHODS: MEDLINE, Embase, and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 
databases were searched for RCTs in patients with HFrEF through April 2025. 
Using frequentist network meta-analysis, HRs for all-cause mortality (primary 
outcome), cardiovascular death, and the composite of cardiovascular death or 
heart failure hospitalization (secondary outcomes) were estimated. Absolute 
benefits were quantified as life-years gained by using BIOSTAT-CHF (Biology 
Study to Tailored Treatment in Chronic Heart Failure) and ASIAN-HF (Asian Sudden 
Cardiac Death in Heart Failure) cohort data.
RESULTS: The analysis included 103,754 patients across 89 randomized controlled 
trials. Relative to placebo, quintuple therapy with ARNi, β-blockers, MRAs, 
SGLT2i, and vericiguat most effectively reduced all-cause mortality (HR: 0.35; 
95% CI: 0.27-0.45), followed by quadruple therapy with ARNi, β-blockers, MRAs, 
and SGLT2i (HR: 0.39; 95% CI: 0.32-0.49). For a representative 70-year-old 
patient, quadruple therapy (ARNi/β-blockers/MRAs/SGLT2i) provided 5.3 additional 
life-years (95% CI: 2.8-7.7) vs no treatment, while quintuple therapy 
(ARNi/β-blockers/MRA/SGLT2i/vericiguat) provided 6.0 additional life-years (95% 
CI: 3.7-8.4).
CONCLUSIONS: This analysis reinforces the substantial mortality and morbidity 
benefit associated with the currently recommended quadruple therapy regimen 
(ARNi, β-blockers, MRAs, and SGLT2i) in patients with HFrEF. The addition of 
vericiguat may provide an incremental survival gain of approximately 0.7 year 
beyond that achieved with quadruple therapy. However, these results should be 
regarded as exploratory, as they are derived from a secondary endpoint of a 
single trial.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2025.08.054
PMID: 40892608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Funding Support and Author Disclosures Dr 
Ouwerkerk has received consulting or speaker fees from Us2.ai; and owns patent 
US-10702247-B2 unrelated to the current work. Dr Butler is a consultant to 
Abbott, American Regent, Amgen, Applied Therapeutic, AskBio, Astellas, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Boston Scientific, Bristol Myers 
Squibb, Cardiac Dimension, Cardiocell, Cardior, CSL Behring, CVRx, Cytokinetics, 
Daxor, Edwards, Element Science, Faraday, Foundry, G3P, Innolife, Impulse 
Dynamics, Imbria, Inventiva, Ionis, Lexicon, Lilly, LivaNova, Janssen, 
Medtronic, Merck, Occlutech, Owkin, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, 
Pharmacosmos, PharmaIN, Prolaio, Regeneron, Renibus, Roche, Salamandra, Sanofi, 
SC Pharma, Secretome, Sequana, SQ Innovation, Tenex, Tricog, Ultromics, Vifor, 
and Zoll. Dr Zannad has received personal fees from Alnylam, Bayer, Biopeutics, 
Boehringer, CellProthera, Centrix, Cereno, Centrix Corteria, CVRx, Lilly, Lupin, 
Merck, Novo Nordisk, Opalia Recordati, Owkin, Polygon, Ribocure, Roche, and 
Viatris; has stock options or equities at Cereno Pharmaceutical; and is the 
founder of Cardiovascular Clinical Trialists (CVCT). Dr Lam is supported by a 
Clinician Scientist Award from the National Medical Research Council of 
Singapore; has received research support from Novo Nordisk and Roche 
Diagnostics; has served as consultant or on the Advisory Board/Steering 
Committee/Executive Committee for Alleviant Medical, Allysta Pharma, AnaCardio 
AB, Applied Therapeutics, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Biopeutics, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Boston Scientific, Bristol Myers Squibb, CardioRenal, CPC Clinical Research, Eli 
Lilly, Impulse Dynamics, Intellia Therapeutics, Ionis Pharmaceutical, Janssen 
Research & Development LLC, Medscape/WebMD Global LLC, Merck, Novartis, Novo 
Nordisk, ProSciento Inc, Quidel Corporation, Radcliffe Group Ltd, Recardio Inc, 
ReCor Medical, Roche Diagnostics, Sanofi, Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics, and 
Us2.ai; and serves as co-founder and non-executive director of Us2.ai. Dr 
Ezekowitz has received research grants from Bayer, Merck, Servier, Amgen, 
Sanofi, Novartis, Cytokinetics, American Regent, and Applied Therapeutics; and 
has received consulting fees from Bayer, Merck, Servier, Amgen, Sanofi, 
Novartis, Cytokinetics, American Regent, and Applied Therapeutics. The employer 
of Dr Voors (University Medical Center Groningen) has received consultancy fees 
and/or research grants from the following companies: Adrenomed, Anacardio, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer AG, Boehringer Ingelheim, BMS, Cardurion, Corteria, Moderna, 
MyoKardia, Merck, Novo Nordisk, Novartis, Roche Diagnostics, and SalubrisBio. Dr 
Tromp is supported by the National University of Singapore Start-up grant, the 
tier 1 grant from the Ministry of Education, and the CS-IRG Grant from the 
National Medical Research Council; has received research support from 
AstraZeneca; has received consulting or speaker fees from Us2.ai and Roche 
Diagnostics; and owns patent US-10702247-B2 unrelated to the current work. All 
other authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to the 
contents of this paper to disclose.