1. JAMA. 2026 Jan 13;335(2):129-139. doi: 10.1001/jama.2025.20620.

Efficacy and Safety of Oral PCSK9 Inhibitor Enlicitide in Adults With 
Heterozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia: A Randomized Clinical Trial.

Ballantyne CM(1), Gellis L(2), Tardif JC(3), Banka P(2), Navar AM(4), Asprusten 
EA(5), Scott R(6), Stroes ESG(7), Froman S(2), Mendizabal G(8), Wang F(9), 
Catapano AL(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Texas Heart Institute, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(2)Merck & Co, Inc, Rahway, New Jersey.
(3)Montreal Heart Institute, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas.
(5)Lipid Clinic, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(6)NZ Clinical Research, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(7)Department of Vascular Medicine, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Amsterdam 
UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(8)MSD Argentina, Munro.
(9)MSD China, Beijing.
(10)University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(11)IRCCS Multimedica, Milan, Italy.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2026 Jan 13;335(2):124-125. doi: 10.1001/jama.2025.20965.

IMPORTANCE: Persons with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (HeFH) are 
at increased risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease due to lifelong 
elevated levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C). Many patients 
with HeFH do not achieve guideline-recommended LDL-C goals with the currently 
available lipid-lowering therapies.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy of enlicitide decanoate (an oral proprotein 
convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 inhibitor) vs placebo in adults with HeFH 
requiring further lowering of LDL-C levels despite use of statin therapy.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This phase 3, randomized clinical trial 
included persons aged 18 years or older with HeFH currently using lipid-lowering 
therapy (taking at least a moderate- or high-intensity statin) and either an 
LDL-C level of 55 mg/dL or greater and a history of major atherosclerotic 
cardiovascular disease or an LDL-C level of 70 mg/dL or greater without a 
history of major atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. The trial was conducted 
at 59 sites across 17 countries; the first participant was screened on August 8, 
2023, and the last follow-up visit occurred on April 7, 2025.
INTERVENTIONS: Participants were randomized (2:1) to 20 mg of enlicitide 
(n = 202) or placebo (n = 101) once daily for 52 weeks.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was the mean percentage change 
in LDL-C level at week 24. The secondary outcomes included the mean percentage 
change in LDL-C level at week 52, the mean percentage change at week 24 in 
levels of non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (non-HDL-C) and 
apolipoprotein B, and the median percentage change at week 24 in lipoprotein(a).
RESULTS: Of the 303 participants (mean age, 52.4 [SD, 13.5] years; 51% were 
female) randomized, 293 (96.7%) completed the trial. The mean LDL-C level was 
119.0 mg/dL (SD, 41.0 mg/dL) at baseline, all had statin current use (81.5% were 
taking a high-intensity statin), and 64.4% were taking ezetimibe. The mean 
percentage change in LDL-C level at week 24 was -58.2% in the enlicitide group 
vs 2.6% in the placebo group (between-group difference, -59.4% [95% CI, -65.6% 
to -53.2%]; P < .001). The mean percentage change in LDL-C level at week 52 was 
-55.3% in the enlicitide group vs 8.7% in the placebo group (between-group 
difference, -61.5% [95% CI, -69.4% to -53.7%]; P < .001). At week 24, the mean 
percentage change in non-HDL-C level was -52.3% in the enlicitide group vs 2.1% 
in the placebo group (between-group difference, -53.0% [95% CI, -58.5% to 
-47.4%]; P < .001), the mean percentage change in apolipoprotein B level was 
-48.2% vs 1.8%, respectively (between-group difference, -49.1% [95% CI, -54.0% 
to -44.3%]; P < .001), and the median percentage change in lipoprotein(a) level 
was -24.7% vs -1.6% (between-group difference, -27.5% [95% CI, -34.3% to 
-20.6%]; P < .001). The incidence of adverse events, serious adverse events, and 
study discontinuation due to adverse events was similar between groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Among adults with HeFH, treatment with enlicitide was well 
tolerated and significantly reduced levels of LDL-C, apolipoprotein B, 
non-HDL-C, and lipoprotein(a).
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT05952869.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2025.20620
PMCID: PMC12598580
PMID: 41206969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Ballantyne 
reported receiving institutional grants from Abbott Diagnostic, the American 
Diabetes Association, the American Heart Association, Akcea Therapeutics, Amgen, 
Arrowhead, Eli Lilly, Ionis, Merck, the National Institutes of Health, 
NewAmsterdam Pharma, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, and Roche Diagnostic and receiving 
personal fees from 89Bio, Abbott Diagnostics, Amgen, Arrowhead, AstraZeneca, 
Denka Seiken, Esperion, Genentech, Heartflow, Ionis, Eli Lilly, Merck, 
NewAmsterdam Pharma, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, and Roche Diagnostic. Drs Gellis, 
Banka, Mendizabal, and Wang and Ms Froman reported being employees of Merck 
Sharp & Dohme, LLC, a subsidiary of Merck & Co, Inc and may own stock and/or 
hold stock options in Merck & Co. Dr Tardif reported receiving grants from 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Ceapro, DalCor Pharmaceuticals, Merck, Novartis, 
Novo-Nordisk, Pfizer, and Verve Therapeutics; receiving personal fees from 
DalCor Pharmaceuticals, Merck, and Pfizer; having a minor equity interest in 
DalCor Pharmaceuticals; and having a patent on pharmacogenomics-guided 
cholesteryl ester transfer protein inhibition licensed to DalCor Pharmaceuticals 
and a patent pending with the Montreal Heart Institute (Institut de Cardiologie 
de Montreal) on the use of colchicine after myocardial infarction. Dr Navar 
reported receiving institutional grants from Amgen, Esperion, and Merck and 
receiving personal fees from the American Medical Association (for serving as a 
Deputy Editor of JAMA Cardiology), Amgen, Arrowhead, Bayer, Esperion, Janssen, 
Eli Lilly, Merck, NewAmsterdam Pharma, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, Roche, 
and Silence Therapeutics. Dr Stroes reported receiving personal fees (paid to 
his institution) and institutional grants from Amgen, Ionis, Merck, Novartis, 
Novo Nordisk, and Ultragenyx. Dr Catapano reported receiving grants from 
Viatris, Ultragenyx, Chiesi, and Amarin and receiving personal fees from Amarin, 
Amgen, AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli Lilly, Esperion, Ionis 
Pharmaceutical, Medscape, Menarini, Merck Sharp & Dohme, NewAmsterdam Pharma, 
Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Regeneron, Recordati, Sanofi, Ultragenyx, and Viatris. 
No other disclosures were reported.


2. Circulation. 2026 Apr 28;153(17):e1154-e1276. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001423. 
Epub 2026 Mar 13.

2026 ACC/AHA/AACVPR/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline on the 
Management of Dyslipidemia: A Report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines.

Writing Committee Members(1); Blumenthal RS, Morris PB, Gaudino M(2), Johnson 
HM(3), Anderson TS(4), Bittner VA(5), Blankstein R, Brewer LC, Cho L(6), de 
Ferranti SD, Gianos E, Gluckman TJ, Gradney KF(7), Isiadinso I(8), Lloyd-Jones 
DM, Marrs JC(9), Martin SS, McLain KH, Mehta LS, Mora S, Mulugeta WM(10), 
Natarajan P, Navar AM, Orringer CE, Polonsky TS, Reynolds HR, Saseen JJ(11), 
Shapiro MD(12), Soffer DE(3), Tynes SA(13), Villavaso CD(14), Virani SS(15), 
Wilkins JT.

Collaborators: Rohatgi A, Kim SM, Alexander KP, Anderson C, Benziger CP, Dixon 
DL, Duprez D, Ferdinand KC, Goldberg AC, Joshi P, Knowles JW, Lavie Jr CJ, 
Linderbaum JA, McEvoy JW, Mehta A, Bairey Merz CN, Nambi V, Orkaby AR, Peña JM, 
Rosenson R, Ruisinger J, Sandner SE, Schott SL, Sperling L, Stone NJ, Toth P, 
Ware AL, Whelton SP, Young II J.

Author information:
(1)Writing committee members are required to recuse themselves from voting on 
sections to which their specific relationships with industry and other entities 
may apply; see Appendix 1 for detailed information.
(2)ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines liaison.
(3)Former ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines member; 
current member during the writing effort.
(4)American Geriatrics Society representative.
(5)American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation 
representative.
(6)ACC/AHA Task Force on Performance Measures liaison.
(7)Patient representative.
(8)Association of Black Cardiologists representative.
(9)American Pharmacists Association representative.
(10)American College of Preventive Medicine representative.
(11)National Lipid Association representative.
(12)American Society for Preventive Cardiology representative.
(13)AHA/ACC Guidelines Staff Consultant.
(14)Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association representative.
(15)American Diabetes Association representative.

Erratum in
    Circulation. 2026 Jun 23;153(25):e1447. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001457.

AIM: The "2026 ACC/AHA/AACVPR/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline on 
the Management of Dyslipidemia" retires and replaces the "2018 
AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline on the 
Management of Blood Cholesterol."
METHODS: A comprehensive literature search was conducted from October 2024 to 
December 2024 to identify clinical studies, systematic reviews and 
meta-analyses, and other evidence conducted on human participants that were 
published in English from MEDLINE (through PubMed), EMBASE, the Cochrane 
Library, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, and other selected 
databases relevant to this guideline.
STRUCTURE: The focus of this clinical practice guideline is to address the 
evaluation, management, and monitoring of individuals with dyslipidemias, 
including high blood cholesterol, hypertriglyceridemia, and elevated 
lipoprotein(a).

DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001423
PMID: 41824552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2026 May 19;87(19):2624-2757. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2025.11.016. Epub 2026 Mar 13.

2026 ACC/AHA/AACVPR/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline on the 
Management of Dyslipidemia: A Report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines.

Blumenthal RS, Morris PB, Gaudino M, Johnson HM, Anderson TS, Bittner VA, 
Blankstein R, Brewer LC, Cho L, de Ferranti SD, Gianos E, Gluckman TJ, Gradney 
KF, Isiadinso I, Lloyd-Jones DM, Marrs JC, Martin SS, McLain KH, Mehta LS, Mora 
S, Mulugeta WM, Natarajan P, Navar AM, Orringer CE, Polonsky TS, Reynolds HR, 
Saseen JJ, Shapiro MD, Soffer DE, Tynes SA, Villavaso CD, Virani SS, Wilkins JT.

AIM: The "2026 ACC/AHA/AACVPR/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline on 
the Management of Dyslipidemia" retires and replaces the "2018 
AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline on the 
Management of Blood Cholesterol."
METHODS: A comprehensive literature search was conducted from October 2024 to 
December 2024 to identify clinical studies, systematic reviews and 
meta-analyses, and other evidence conducted on human participants that were 
published in English from MEDLINE (through PubMed), EMBASE, the Cochrane 
Library, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, and other selected 
databases relevant to this guideline.
STRUCTURE: The focus of this clinical practice guideline is to address the 
evaluation, management, and monitoring of individuals with dyslipidemias, 
including high blood cholesterol, hypertriglyceridemia, and elevated 
lipoprotein(a).

Copyright © 2026. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2025.11.016
PMID: 41824590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Lancet. 2026 Feb 14;407(10529):689-703. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(25)01578-8. Epub 
2026 Feb 5.

Assessment of adverse effects attributed to statin therapy in product labels: a 
meta-analysis of double-blind randomised controlled trials.

Cholesterol Treatment Trialists' (CTT) Collaboration. Electronic address: 
ctt@ndph.ox.ac.uk; Cholesterol Treatment Trialists' (CTT) Collaboration.

Collaborators: Reith C, Blackwell L, Emberson JR, Preiss D, Spata E, Davies K, 
Halls H, Harper C, Holland L, Wilson K, Humphrey R, Roddick AJ, Cannon CP, Davis 
BR, Durrington PN, Goto S, Hitman GA, Hovingh GK, Koenig W, Krane V, Landray MJ, 
Mihaylova B, Newman C, Probstfield JL, Sabatine MS, Sattar N, Schwartz GG, 
Tonkin AM, White HD, Armitage J, Keech A, Simes J, Collins R, Baigent C, Barnes 
E, Fulcher J, Herrington WG, Kirby A, O'Connell R, Amarenco P, Arashi H, Barter 
P, Betteridge DJ, Blazing M, Blauw GJ, Bonaca M, Bosch J, Bowman L, Braunwald E, 
Bulbulia R, Byington R, Clarke R, Clearfield M, Cobbe S, Colhoun HM, Dahlöf B, 
de Lemos J, Downs JR, Fellström B, Fine L, Flather M, Ford I, Franzosi MG, 
Fuller J, Furberg C, Glynn R, Goldbourt U, Gordon D, Gotto A Jr, Grimm R, Gupta 
A, Hawkins CM, Haynes R, Holdaas H, Hopewell J, Jardine A, Jukema JW, Kastelein 
JJ, Kean S, Kearney P, Kitas G, Kjekshus J, Knatterud G, Knopp RH, Kjekshus J, 
Koren M, LaRosa J, Latini R, Lonn E, Lucci D, MacFadyen J, Macfarlane P, 
MacMahon S, Maggioni A, Marchioli R, Marschner I, Moyé L, Murray H, Murphy S, 
Neil A, Nicolis EB, Packard C, Parish S, Pedersen TR, Peto R, Pfeffer M, Poulter 
N, Pressel S, Rahman M, Ridker PM, Robertson M, Sacks F, Schmieder R, Serruys 
PW, Sever P, Shaw J, Shepherd J, Simpson L, Sleight P, Smeeth L, Tavazzi L, 
Tobert J, Tognoni G, Trompet S, Varigos J, Wanner C, Wedel H, Weis S, Welch KM, 
Wikstrand J, Wilhelmsen L, Wiviott S, Yamaguchi J, Young R, Yusuf S, Zannad F.

BACKGROUND: Statin product labels (eg, Summaries of Product Characteristics 
[SmPCs]) list certain adverse outcomes as potential treatment-related effects 
based mainly on non-randomised and non-blinded studies, which might be subject 
to bias. We aimed to assess the evidence for such undesirable effects more 
reliably through a meta-analysis of individual participant data from large 
double-blind trials of statin therapy.
METHODS: In this meta-analysis of individual participant-level data from 
double-blind randomised controlled trials, we generated a list of all 
undesirable effect terms listed in statin SmPCs by searching an electronic 
medicines compendium for five statins (atorvastatin, fluvastatin, pravastatin, 
rosuvastatin, and simvastatin). Randomised trials were eligible for 
meta-analysis of these effects if they involved at least 1000 participants, had 
a scheduled treatment period of at least 2 years, and involved a double-blind 
comparison of statin versus placebo or of a more intensive versus a less 
intensive statin regimen. Event rate ratios (RRs) and 95% CIs were calculated 
with statistical significance assessed after controlling the false discovery 
rate (FDR) at 5%.
FINDINGS: 19 trials compared statin versus placebo (123 940 participants, median 
follow-up 4·5 years [IQR 3·1-5·4]). In addition to previously reported effects 
on muscle outcomes and diabetes, only four of 66 further undesirable outcomes 
that had been attributed to statins were FDR significant: abnormal liver 
transaminases (783 participants [0·30% per annum] allocated statin vs 556 [0·22% 
per annum] allocated placebo, RR 1·41 [95% CI 1·26-1·57]) and other liver 
function test abnormalities (651 participants [0·25% per annum] allocated statin 
vs 518 [0·20% per annum] allocated placebo, RR 1·26 [1·12-1·41]; absolute annual 
excess of 0·13% for combined liver function test abnormality), urinary 
composition alteration (556 [0·21% per annum] allocated statin vs 472 [0·18% per 
annum] allocated placebo, RR 1·18 [1·04-1·33]), and oedema (3495 [1·38% per 
annum] allocated statin vs 3299 [1·31% per annum] allocated placebo, RR 1·07 
[1·02-1·12]). Analysis of the four trials of more intensive versus less 
intensive statin regimens also found significant excesses for abnormal liver 
transaminases and other liver function test abnormalities (supporting a 
dose-dependent effect), but no significant excess was found for urinary 
composition alteration or oedema.
INTERPRETATION: Adverse event data from blinded randomised trials do not support 
causal relationships between statin therapy and most of the conditions 
(including cognitive impairment, depression, sleep disturbance, and peripheral 
neuropathy) listed in product labels as potential undesirable effects. In light 
of these findings, such labelling and other official sources of health 
information should be revised so that patients and their doctors can make 
appropriately informed decisions regarding statin therapy.
FUNDING: British Heart Foundation, UK Medical Research Council, and Australian 
National Health and Medical Research Council.

Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open 
Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(25)01578-8
PMCID: PMC7619005
PMID: 41655587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests CR, LB, JRE, DP, KD, 
CH, HH, LH, KW, RH, AJR, MJL, BM, JA, RC, and CB are affiliated with the 
Nuffield Department of Population Health (NDPH) at the University of Oxford, 
which has an explicit policy of not accepting any personal honoraria payments 
directly or indirectly from the pharmaceutical and food industries. NDPH only 
seeks reimbursement to the University of Oxford for the costs of travel and 
accommodation to participate in scientific meetings 
(https://www.ndph.ox.ac.uk/about/independence-of-research). Project and 
departmental grants have been awarded to NDPH by the British Heart Foundation 
and the UK Medical Research Council which has helped support NDPH staff working 
on this project. CR reports previously receiving funding to the University of 
Oxford (but no personal funding) from Merck–Schering-Plough Pharmaceuticals for 
the SHARP trial of simvastatin–ezetimibe, the UK National Institute for Health 
and Care Research Health Technology Assessment (NIHR HTA) programme (17/140/02) 
and holding unpaid roles on the Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium 
as a board member and WHO as a scientific advisor. JRE declares grant funding 
from Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and AstraZeneca to the University of Oxford (but 
no personal funding) to support the Mexico City Prospective Study, and 
Boehringer Ingelheim and Eli Lilly for the EMPA-KIDNEY trial. DP reports 
receiving funding to the University of Oxford (but no personal funding) from 
Novartis for the ORION 4 trial of inclisiran, Novo Nordisk for the ASCEND PLUS 
trial of semaglutide, and Boehringer Ingelheim and Eli Lilly for the EMPA-KIDNEY 
trial, and being a committee member for National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence Cardiovascular Disease: Risk Assessment and Reduction Including Lipid 
Modification guideline. ES reports now being an employee of AstraZeneca. CH 
reports receiving funding to the University of Oxford (but no personal funding) 
from Novo Nordisk for the ASCEND PLUS trial of semaglutide. AJR reports 
receiving funding to the University of Oxford (but no personal funding) from the 
NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Eli Lilly. CPC 
reports grants or contracts from Amgen, Better Therapeutics, 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, and Novo Nordisk; salary support from Colorado Prevention 
Center Clinical Research, which gets research grant support from Amgen, Bayer, 
Cleerly, Esperion, Lexicon and Silence; consulting fees from Amryt–Chiesi, 
Amgen, Ascendia, Biogen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, CSL 
Behring, Genomadix, Lilly, Janssen, Lexicon, Milestone, Novartis, Pfizer, and 
Rhoshan; and participation on a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) or 
Advisory Board for Areteia, Novo Nordisk, ROMTherapy, and the Veterans 
Administration. SG reports grants or contracts to his institution from MEXT–JSPS 
KAKENHI 19H03661, AMED (grant number A368TS and A447TR), and the Nakatani 
Foundation, consulting fees from Jansen Pharma, Amgen, and Merck Sharp and 
Dohme, payment or honoraria from Sysmex, and roles as Vice President of The 
Japanese College of Angiology, Associate Editor for Circulation, and Council 
Member of the International Society of Thrombosis and Haemostasis. GAH reports 
funding from Pfizer, Diabetes UK, and NHS England for the CARDS trial. GKH 
reports being an employee of Novo Nordisk and having stock options in Novo 
Nordisk. WK reports grants and provision of reagents to their institution from 
Singulex, Dr Beckmann Pharma, Abbott, and Roche Diagnostics, consulting fees 
from AstraZeneca, Novartis, Amgen, Pfizer, The Medicines Company, DalCor 
Pharmaceuticals, Kowa, Corvidia Therapeutics, OMEICOS, Daichii Sankyo, Novo 
Nordisk, New Amsterdam Pharma, TenSixteen Bio, Genentech, and Esperion, and 
payment or honoraria from Bristol Myers Squibb, Novartis, Amgen, Berlin-Chemie, 
Sanofi, and AstraZeneca. MJL reports funding to their institution for clinical 
trials from Novartis, Regeneron, and Boehringer Ingelheim, funding to their 
institution for trial methodology research from Regeneron, Moderna, GSK, and 
Sanofi, funding to their institution for consultancy from GSK, Verve, and Marea, 
and roles as Adviser, Regulatory Affairs Committee for the European Society of 
Cardiology and Lead for the Good Clinical Trials Collaborative (funded by 
Wellcome and the Gates Foundation). BM reports a research grant to the 
University of Oxford and Queen Mary University of London from UK NIHR HTA 
(17/140/02) and a research grant to Queen Mary University of London from UK NIHR 
Barts Biomedical Research Centre, and support for attending meetings or travel 
from the European Society of Cardiology for attending a round table addressing 
unmet medical needs in cardiology. CN reports royalties for a textbook from 
Elsevier of less than US$5000 in the past 3 years, support from the Endocrine 
Society for travel and registration for lecture and for membership on planning 
committee in relation to the 2024 and 2025 meetings, and an unpaid roles as Vice 
President of the Medical Women's International Association and a board member 
for the Women in Medicine Legacy Foundation. MSS reports research grant support 
through Brigham and Women's Hospital from Abbott, Amgen, Anthos Therapeutics, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Daiichi-Sankyo, Ionis, Marea, Merck, 
Novartis, Pfizer, Saghmos Therapeutics, and Verve Therapeutics, consulting fees 
from Amgen, AMPEL BioSolutions, Anthos Therapeutics, AstraZeneca, Beren 
Therapeutics, Boehringer Ingelheim, CCRN, Dr Reddy's Laboratories, General 
Medicines, Merck, NATF, Novo Nordisk, and Precision BioSciences, and reports 
being a member of the TIMI Study Group, which has also received institutional 
research grant support through Brigham and Women's Hospital from Abiomed, ARCA 
Biopharma, Cleerly, Janssen Research and Development, MedImmune, Regeneron 
Pharmaceuticals, Roche, Softcell Medical, The Medicines Company, and Zora 
Biosciences. NS reports grants or contracts paid to his institution from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, and Roche, consulting fees paid via 
his institution from AbbVie, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Carmot 
Therapeutics, Eli Lilly, GSK, Hanmi Pharmaceuticals, Menarini-Ricerche, Metsera, 
Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, and Roche, personal consulting fees from Novartis, and 
payment or honoraria paid via his institution from Abbott Laboratories, AbbVie, 
Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Novo Nordisk, and Roche. 
GGS reports research support to the University of Colorado from AstraZeneca, 
Sanofi, and Silence Therapeutics and support from The University of Oxford for 
travel to attend clinical trial steering committee meetings. AMT reports 
payments for chairing a steering committee related to a survey of the adequacy 
of lipid management in patients in Australian general practice from Novartis and 
membership of the Data Monitoring Committee of the ORION-4 study of inclisiran 
supported by Novartis. HDW reports grant support paid to his institution by 
Sanofi-Aventis, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals for the ODYSSEY OUTCOMES trial, by 
American Regent for the HEART–FID study, by DalCor Pharma UK for the GenE Study, 
by CSL Behring for the AEGIS-II trial, by US National Institutes of Health for 
the ISCHEMIA and MINT studies, by Esperion Therapeutics for the CLEAR Outcomes 
study, by Omthera Pharmaceuticals for the STRENGTH trial, by Sanofi Aventis 
Australia for the SOLIST-WHF and SCORED trials, by Janssen Research and 
Development for the Librexia AF study and Librexia ACS studies, by Merck Sharp & 
Dohme (New Zealand) for the MK0616 study; fees from DalCor Pharma UK for serving 
on the steering committee for the GenE Study, CSL Behring for serving on the 
steering committee for the AEGIS-II trial, Sanofi Aventis Australia for serving 
on the steering committee for the SOLIST-WHF and SCORED trials, Esperion 
Therapeutics for serving on the steering committee for the CLEAR Outcomes study, 
and Janssen Research and Development for serving on the steering committee for 
the Librexia AF study and Librexia ACS studies; support from the South 
Australian Health and Medical Research Institute for attendance at the clinical 
trial forum (2022 and 2023), the National Health and Medical Research Council 
(NHMRC) Clinical Trials Centre; being the University of Sydney Chair of the DSMB 
for the EVIDENCE Study; being on the CSL Behring Advisory Board; and receiving 
VERVE HF advisory board fees (2024). JA reports an unpaid Independent Data 
Monitoring Committee role for the WOMAN2 trial. AK reports funding from the 
NHMRC Australia with an NHMRC Programme grant and Senior Research Fellowship to 
support all research activities; research grant funding from the Australian 
Medical Research Future Fund; research grants from Amgen, Abbott, and Viatris; 
being a DSMB member for the Harvard University and Kowa Pharmaceuticals 
PROMINENT trial; and drug provisions for research from Viatris. JS reports 
research grant to his institution from NHMRC Australia, Bristol Myers Squibb, 
Roche, Bayer, Amgen, and MSD, advisory board fees to his institution from 
FivepHusion, and being an unpaid Chair of the STAREE DSMB. RC declares grants to 
the University of Oxford from Merck, Novartis, UK Medical Research Council, 
British Heart Foundation, Cancer Research UK, AstraZeneca, Wellcome Trust, and 
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals; a patent for a statin-related myopathy genetic test 
from Boston Heart Diagnostics for which RC waived any personal reward with any 
share in royalty and other payments waived in favour of the Nuffield Department 
of Population Health, University of Oxford; and being Deputy Chair of the 
not-for-profit clinical trial company PROTAS, Chief Executive of UK Biobank, and 
Chair of the steering committee of the ORION-4 trial of inclisiran. CB declares 
support from Boehringer Ingelheim through a grant to the University of Oxford 
for the EMPA-KIDNEY and EASi-KIDNEY trials, being the Medical Research Council 
Population Health Research Unit Director from 2019–24, being a co-applicant on a 
Health Data Research UK Substantive Site award from 2018–23, being an unpaid 
DSMB or Advisory Board Chair for Merck for a phase 2 trial of factor 
X1-inhibitor for dialysis patients and for the NIHR HTA to prepare for a kidney 
care trial, and having unpaid roles in the NIHR HTA as Chair of Aspirin To 
Target Arterial Events in Chronic Kidney Disease (ATTACK) and Desmopressin for 
Acute Stroke due to Haemorrhage (DASH). All other authors declare no competing 
interests.


5. World J Cardiol. 2026 Feb 26;18(2):114960. doi: 10.4330/wjc.v18.i2.114960.

Residual risk in atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease after statin therapy: 
Clinical mechanisms and management strategies.

Tan SH(1), Wu JL(2), Zhuo SX(2), Zhang Y(3), Wang M(4).

Author information:
(1)International Education College, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Shanghai 201203, China.
(2)Department of Medical Rehabilitation, Nanmatou Community Health Service 
Center, Shanghai 200125, China.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Longhua 
Hospital, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 200032, 
China.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Longhua 
Hospital, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 200032, 
China. wangmiao_126@126.com.

Atherosclerotic is one of the leading causes of death worldwide. Although 
lowering low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels reduces 
cardiovascular risk, studies have shown that even when LDL-C is well controlled, 
patients may still develop atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, a phenomenon 
known as residual risk. This review synthesizes current research on the 
definition, pathogenesis, and therapeutic strategies of residual risk, aiming to 
provide a theoretical basis for future advances in its diagnosis and management. 
Evidence derived exclusively from human clinical trials, cohort studies, and 
meta-analyses is summarized, excluding data from animal or in vitro experiments 
to maintain clinical relevance. We focus on lipid and inflammatory biomarkers 
beyond LDL-C, including non-high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, 
apolipoprotein B, lipoprotein(a), triglycerides, triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, 
HDL dysfunction, and systemic inflammatory markers. Therapeutic interventions 
encompassing lifestyle modification, lipid-lowering agents, anti-inflammatory 
therapies, and novel gene-silencing approaches are reviewed. Evidence indicates 
that in patients receiving statin therapy, non-HDL-cholesterol and 
apolipoprotein B provide superior assessment of residual risk compared with 
LDL-C. Lipoprotein(a) remains predictive of cardiovascular events even when 
LDL-C levels are well controlled, while elevated triglycerides and 
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins consistently associate with higher cardiovascular 
risk. Inflammatory biomarkers such as high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and 
interleukin-6 serve as indicators of residual inflammatory risk. Persistent 
residual risk despite LDL-C control underscores the need for integrated, 
multi-target strategies to achieve comprehensive cardiovascular protection.

©The Author(s) 2026. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.4330/wjc.v18.i2.114960
PMCID: PMC12897005
PMID: 41694036

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.